nowadays to find out how hard works
medicine has invented machines for
scientists to see inside the body at the
North Carolina College of Veterinary
Medicine an alligator is due for a CT
scan to prevent him injuring himself or
the team his eyes are taped over and his
arms and legs restrained alligator
straitjacket to help relax the alligator
a bizarre form of hypnosis is used we're
just putting him to sleep by stroking
his belly it helps an awful lot that he
has all the tape on so that we can get
to his belly but this actually works
[Music]
okay I'll turn the lights out so we can
see the guidelines and let's get him set
up the images on the screen show a
cross-section through the alligators
chest and with each new scan they are
building up a picture of the structure
of the heart however until recently
there was little point in doing this to
a fossil
because soft tissues don't normally
fossilize with skeletons like big owl
scientists could only speculate on what
was inside a dinosaurs chest
but this year a highly controversial
find may have changed all that
[Music]
this is an absolutely superb specimen of
a small plant eating dinosaur we call it
vessel a source in paleontology but here
at the Museum we like to call it willow
the little dinosaur with a heart and in
this region is the actual preservation
of structures which demonstrate the
presence of a heart this structure was
so peculiar that my colleagues decided
to probe it with an x-ray scan to help
read willow scan the images inside the
alligator's chest provide a guide as we
move through the thorax then we're going
to see the lung fields and then coming
up between the two lung fields we'll
start to see a solid mass and that's the
heart shown on the alligator scan as a
graphic the two aortas or tubes which
carry blood around the body are
highlighted
they lead from the two ventricles of the
heart this plumbing
although perfect for an alligator only
allows it short bursts of activity
inside willow the picture appears to be
different if you look at this
three-dimensional reconstruction of
willows CT scan we can see right here
that the two ventricles are easy to
identify highlight it at the bottom of
the picture then look up above the heart
base we see this corrugated structure
that's the single aorta if this is a
single aorta it would be remarkable
because it would show that this
dinosaurs heart had the potential to
power it for the marathon as well as the
Sprint unlike the crocodiles apparently
this little dinosaur had a heart that is
more like a bird or a mammal than like a
crocodile
this intriguing fossil is still under
scrutiny but if confirmed willows heart
will give a new more energetic look to
the dinosaurs
if this dinosaur had a heart that looks
advanced then that implies that it also
had a high metabolic rate and now
instead there is ample reason to think
of these as rather high-energy active
animals